In this video, we're going
to look at how we can use
Power Query to get and
transform data from a database.
To help with enrollments
and reporting,
we actually need an
up-to-date staff list
inside our Excel workbook.
But the staff list is actually
maintained in a database.
Now what would
typically happen in
this scenario is the data
would be downloaded
from the database,
imported into Excel,
and then cleaned up,
and this would probably
have to happen quite
regularly to keep
the data up to date.
This is a very
time-consuming process.
With Power Query, you can
actually connect directly to
the database and make
the transformations
direct in Power Query,
so all you have to do is
hit the Refresh button,
and you're guaranteed
an up-to-date dataset.
Let's see how to do it.
We're starting in our staff list,
and we're going to come
to our data ribbon,
get and transform, get data,
and we're going to get
it from a database.
There's a great range of
options to choose from,
including SQL Server, Oracle.
Even if you don't see
your option there,
you can usually use
an ODBC connection
to connect to just
about anything.
The option we're
going to go for is
Access Database and then
navigate to where
your workbooks are,
and you should see a
database called Staff.
We're just going to
double-click on that.
If you're connecting
to Oracle or SQL,
you will probably be asked
for some login credentials,
which you'll need to provide,
but otherwise the
process is very similar.
Once you've connected
to the database,
it will show you a list
of all the tables,
and usually, there'll
be quite a few.
But we've just got
the Staff table,
so we're going to click on that.
There's our preview.
But we do want to make
some transformations.
Please click the Transform
Data or the Edit button.
We're back in Power Query.
Now, if you'd like to actually
zoom out a little bit,
you can press Control
Shift plus and
just do it a few times
until the data is readable.
Now the first change we would
like to make is start date.
We don't want to
include the time,
but this data type
is set to date time.
So we're going to change it.
Select the Start Date column,
come to the Home ribbon,
and you're looking for
the Data Type button,
which at the moment is
showing it as Date Time.
We're going to
click the dropdown,
and we're going to change
it to just date. Too easy.
The next thing we want
to do is we want to
combine the first
name and last name.
Because when we're doing
lookups and reporting,
it's easier to have the staff
name as a single column.
Again, really easy
with Power Query.
We're going to select
our First Name column.
We're going to hold our Shift key
down and click our
Last Name column.
Now we're going to come
to the Transform ribbon.
Here, the middle,
we're looking for
the Merge Columns button.
We're going to click that.
The first thing that's
going to check is,
do we need a separator?
Yes, we do. Click the dropdown,
and we're going to choose Space.
If we don't change this,
it's going to call
the column Merge,
which is not a great name.
We're going to call our
new column Stuff Name,
and then we're going
to click "Okay" You
can now see we have a single
column with just Staff Name.
It's a little bit like
the concatenate operator,
but again, it's all
automated for us.
When new staff get
added to the database,
we hit the Refresh button,
and we'll see them come through
with a name and a single column.
We're ready to load that data.
We're going to come
to our Home tab,
Close & Load, Close & load Too,
and we're going to put it in
an existing worksheet and say
"Okay" There's our data
linked to our database.
Ideally, we shouldn't
really change the data in
Excel because this is really
linked to the database.
So when we refresh it,
it's going to overwrite
any local changes
we've made with the
actual dataset.
But what that means is we can now
update the data in one place.
But we can work with
it direct in Excel,
and at any point,
we can just hit the
Refresh button,
and this data will update.
We've seen in this
video how we can use
Power Query to get and
transform data from a database.
In the next video,
we're going to look at
something even more amazing,
and that is how we
can pull data from
a folder. Keep watching.